README.md, before:

# | aicra |

[![Go version](https://img.shields.io/badge/go_version-1.10.3-blue.svg)](https://golang.org/doc/go1.10)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/git.xdrm.io/go/aicra)](https://goreportcard.com/report/git.xdrm.io/go/aicra)
[![Go doc](https://godoc.org/git.xdrm.io/go/aicra?status.svg)](https://godoc.org/git.xdrm.io/go/aicra)

**Aicra** is a self-working framework coded in *Go* that allows anyone to create a fully featured REST API. It features type checking, authentication management through middlewares, file upload, rich argument parsing (*i.e. url slash-separated, urlencoded, form-data, json*), nested routes, project builder (*i.e. aicra*), etc.



This framework is based over some of the following concepts.

| concept | explanation |
|---|---|
| meaningful defaults | Defaults and default values work without further understanding |
| config driven | Avoid information duplication. Automate anything that can be without losing control. Have *one* configuration that summarizes the whole project, its behavior and its automation flow. |


> A working example is available [here](https://git.xdrm.io/example/aicra)



#### Table of contents

[TOC]



#### I. Installation

You need a recent machine with `go` installed.

> This package has not been tested under the version **1.10**.



##### 1. Download and install the package

```bash
$ go get -u git.xdrm.io/go/aicra
```

It should now be available locally and available for your imports.



##### 2. Compile the command-line builder

You should then compile the project builder to help you manage your projects.

```bash
$ go install git.xdrm.io/go/aicra/cmd/aicra
```



> The executable `aicra` will be placed into your `$GOPATH/bin` folder, if added to your environment PATH it should be available as a standalone command in your terminal. If not, you can simply run `$GOPATH/bin/aicra` to use the command or create a symlink into `/usr/local/bin` or the PATH folder of your choice for less characters to type.



#### II. Setup a project

The default project structure for **aicra** is as follows :





```
├── main.go          - the entry point
├── manifest.json    - the configuration file
├── middleware       - middleware implementations
├── controller       - controller implementations
└── types            - custom type for the type checker

```

In order for your project to be run, each controller, middleware and type checker has to be compiled as a *plugin* (*i.e. shared objects*). They can then be loaded by the server.



##### 1. Configuration

The whole project behavior is described inside the `manifest.json` file. For a better understanding of the format, take a look at this working [template](https://git.xdrm.io/example/aicra/src/master/manifest.json). This file contains information about :

- resources routes and their methods
- every input for each method (called *argument*)
- every output for each method
- scope permissions
- input policy : type, required/optional, default value, variable renaming, etc.



##### 2. Controllers

For each route, you'll have to place your implementation into the `controller` folder following the naming convention : add `/i.go` at the end of the route.

> Example - `/path/to/some/uri` will be inside `controller/path/to/some/uri/i.go`.

A fully working example is available [here](https://git.xdrm.io/example/aicra).



##### 3. Middlewares

In order for your project to manage authentication, the best solution is to create middlewares, there are programs that updates a *Scope* according to internal or persistent (*i.e.* database) information and the actual http request. They are all run before each request it routed by aicra. The scope are used to match the `scope` field in the configuration file and automatically block non-authed requests. Scopes can also be used for implementation-specific behavior.



Each middleware must be directly inside the `middleware` folder.

> Example - the `1-authentication` middleware will be inside `middleware/1-authentication/main.go`.

**Note** - middleware execution will be ordered by name. Prefixing your middlewares with their order is a good practice.



##### 4. Custom types

In your configuration you will have to use built-in types (*e.g.* int, any, varchar), but if you want project-specific ones, you can add your own types inside the `type` folder. You can check what structure to follow by looking at the [built-in types](https://git.xdrm.io/go/aicra/src/master/internal/checker/default).



Each type must be inside a unique package directly inside the `type` folder. The package name is arbitrary and does not have to match the name (but it is better if it is explicit), because the `Match()` method already matches the name.



#### III. Build your project

After each controller, middleware or type edition, you'll have to rebuild the project. This can be achieved through the command-line builder.

Usage is `aicra [options] /path/to/your/project`.

Options:

- `-c` - overrides the default controllers path ; default is `./controller`
- `-m` - overrides the default middlewares path ; default is `./middleware`
- `-t` - overrides the default custom types path ; default is `./custom-types`



For a project that does not need a different structure, you just have to run this command under your project root

```bash
$ aicra .
```

The output should look like

 ![that](./README.assets/1531039386654.png).

#### IV. Main

The main default program is pretty small as below :

```go
import "git.xdrm.io/go/aicra"

func main() {
	server, err := aicra.New("manifest.json")
	if err != nil { return }

	server.Listen(4242)
}
```




#### V. Change Log

- [x] human-readable json configuration
- [x] nested routes (*i.e. `/user/:id:` and `/user/post/:id:`*)
- [ ] nested URL arguments (*i.e. `/user/:id:` and `/user/:id:/post/​:id:​`*)
- [x] useful http methods: GET, POST, PUT, DELETE
- [x] manage URL, query and body arguments:
  - [x] multipart/form-data (variables and file uploads)
  - [x] application/x-www-form-urlencoded
  - [x] application/json
- [x] required vs. optional parameters with a default value
- [x] parameter renaming
- [ ] generic authentication system (*i.e. you can override the built-in one*)
- [x] generic type check (*i.e. implement custom types alongside built-in ones*)
- [ ] built-in types
  - [x] `any` - wildcard matching all values
  - [x] `int` - any number (*e.g. float, int, uint*)
  - [x] `string` - any text
  - [x] `varchar(min, max)` - any string with a length between `min` and `max`
  - [ ] `<a>` - array containing **only** elements matching `a` type
  - [ ] `<a:b>` - map containing **only** keys of type `a` and values of type `b` (*a or b can be ommited*)
- [x] generic controllers implementation (shared objects)
- [x] response interface
- [ ] devmode watcher : watch manifest, watch plugins to compile + hot reload them

Commit message:

server implements http.Handler (ServeHTTP(responseWrite, request)) | apirequest.BuildFromHTTPRequest() becomes apirequest.FromHTTP() | update readme

README.md, after:

# | aicra |

[![Go version](https://img.shields.io/badge/go_version-1.10.3-blue.svg)](https://golang.org/doc/go1.10)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/git.xdrm.io/go/aicra)](https://goreportcard.com/report/git.xdrm.io/go/aicra)
[![Go doc](https://godoc.org/git.xdrm.io/go/aicra?status.svg)](https://godoc.org/git.xdrm.io/go/aicra)

**Aicra** is a self-working framework coded in *Go* that allows anyone to create a fully featured REST API. It features type checking, authentication management through middlewares, file upload, rich argument parsing (*i.e. url slash-separated, urlencoded, form-data, json*), nested routes, project builder (*i.e. aicra*), etc.



This framework is based over some of the following concepts.

| concept | explanation |
|---|---|
| meaningful defaults | Defaults and default values work without further understanding |
| config driven | Avoid information duplication. Automate anything that can be without losing control. Have *one* configuration that summarizes the whole project, its behavior and its automation flow. |


> A working example is available [here](https://git.xdrm.io/example/aicra)



#### Table of contents

[TOC]



#### I. Installation

You need a recent machine with `go` installed.

> This package has not been tested under the version **1.10**.



##### 1. Download and install the package

```bash
go get -u git.xdrm.io/go/aicra
```

It should now be available locally and available for your imports.



##### 2. Compile the command-line builder

You should then compile the project builder to help you manage your projects.

```bash
go install git.xdrm.io/go/aicra/cmd/aicra
```



> The executable `aicra` will be placed into your `$GOPATH/bin` folder, if added to your environment PATH it should be available as a standalone command in your terminal. If not, you can simply run `$GOPATH/bin/aicra` to use the command or create a symlink into `/usr/local/bin` or the PATH folder of your choice for less characters to type.



#### II. Setup a project

The default project structure for **aicra** is as follows :





```
├── main.go          - the entry point
├── manifest.json    - the configuration file
├── middleware       - middleware implementations
├── controller       - controller implementations
└── types            - custom type for the type checker

```

In order for your project to be run, each controller, middleware and type checker has to be compiled as a *plugin* (*i.e. shared objects*). They can then be loaded by the server.



##### 1. Configuration

The whole project behavior is described inside the `manifest.json` file. For a better understanding of the format, take a look at this working [template](https://git.xdrm.io/example/aicra/src/master/manifest.json). This file contains information about :

- resources routes and their methods
- every input for each method (called *argument*)
- every output for each method
- scope permissions
- input policy : type, required/optional, default value, variable renaming, etc.



##### 2. Controllers

For each route, you'll have to place your implementation into the `controller` folder following the naming convention : add `/i.go` at the end of the route.

> Example - `/path/to/some/uri` will be inside `controller/path/to/some/uri/i.go`.

A fully working example is available [here](https://git.xdrm.io/example/aicra).



##### 3. Middlewares

In order for your project to manage authentication, the best solution is to create middlewares, there are programs that updates a *Scope* according to internal or persistent (*i.e.* database) information and the actual http request. They are all run before each request it routed by aicra. The scope are used to match the `scope` field in the configuration file and automatically block non-authed requests. Scopes can also be used for implementation-specific behavior.



Each middleware must be directly inside the `middleware` folder.

> Example - the `1-authentication` middleware will be inside `middleware/1-authentication/main.go`.

**Note** - middleware execution will be ordered by name. Prefixing your middlewares with their order is a good practice.



##### 4. Custom types

In your configuration you will have to use built-in types (*e.g.* int, any, varchar), but if you want project-specific ones, you can add your own types inside the `type` folder. You can check what structure to follow by looking at the [built-in types](https://git.xdrm.io/go/aicra/src/master/internal/checker/default).



Each type must be inside a unique package directly inside the `type` folder. The package name is arbitrary and does not have to match the name (but it is better if it is explicit), because the `Match()` method already matches the name.



#### III. Build your project

After each controller, middleware or type edition, you'll have to rebuild the project. This can be achieved through the command-line builder.

Usage is `aicra [options] /path/to/your/project`.

Options:

- `-c` - overrides the default controllers path ; default is `./controller`
- `-m` - overrides the default middlewares path ; default is `./middleware`
- `-t` - overrides the default custom types path ; default is `./custom-types`



For a project that does not need a different structure, you just have to run this command under your project root

```bash
aicra .
```

The output should look like

 ![that](./README.assets/1531039386654.png).

#### IV. Main

The main default program is pretty small as below :

```go
package main

import (
	"git.xdrm.io/go/aicra"
	"net/http"
)

func main() {
 
    // 1. create server
	server, err := aicra.New("manifest.json")
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	
    // 2. listen to incoming http requests
	err = http.ListenAndServe("127.0.0.1:4242", server)
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}

}
```




#### V. Change Log

- [x] human-readable json configuration
- [x] nested routes (*i.e. `/user/:id:` and `/user/post/:id:`*)
- [ ] nested URL arguments (*i.e. `/user/:id:` and `/user/:id:/post/​:id:​`*)
- [x] useful http methods: GET, POST, PUT, DELETE
- [x] manage URL, query and body arguments:
  - [x] multipart/form-data (variables and file uploads)
  - [x] application/x-www-form-urlencoded
  - [x] application/json
- [x] required vs. optional parameters with a default value
- [x] parameter renaming
- [ ] generic authentication system (*i.e. you can override the built-in one*)
- [x] generic type check (*i.e. implement custom types alongside built-in ones*)
- [ ] built-in types
  - [x] `any` - wildcard matching all values
  - [x] `int` - any number (*e.g. float, int, uint*)
  - [x] `string` - any text
  - [x] `varchar(min, max)` - any string with a length between `min` and `max`
  - [ ] `<a>` - array containing **only** elements matching `a` type
  - [ ] `<a:b>` - map containing **only** keys of type `a` and values of type `b` (*a or b can be ommited*)
- [x] generic controllers implementation (shared objects)
- [x] response interface
- [ ] devmode watcher : watch manifest, watch plugins to compile + hot reload them
